LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

C2,

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY


NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

Qi Se:

N

BSSSs] |

UNL

q > }
txx=x5 |

| and to promote among them all

S| | sixih day of November, 1949,do HEREBY ADOPT,
y 949

Naan |

Oa
y:

TAN ent
Cee
re

AOS: THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly

S)R\ | resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN DEMO~ | |@ag7
| CRATIC REPUBLIC and fo secure to all its citizens:

JUSTICE, social,economic and political;

LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship ;

EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual |
and the unity of the Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY his twenty-

ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
CONSTITUTION.

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024



NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

New Hope, New Direction

Preface

Dear Voters, under the able leadership of
Ajitdada Pawar, the Nationalist Congress
Party, as an ally of NDA, is presenting its
Manifesto with the slogan “New hope, New
Direction’.

Our country is the world’s largest democracy
with rich diversity. Each Indian citizen has
the duty and right to vote for who represents
and leads our country.

India has the potential to lead the world. In
the last decade, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Narendra Modiji India has
ascended a pinnacle of glory among all
countries.

The Nationalist Congress Party is
contesting the Lok Sabha elections under
leadership of Ajitdada Pawar with the motto
‘Nationalists for the Nation’.

The constitution bestowed upon us by Bharat
Ratna Dr. Babasahab Ambedkar has allowed
us to set aside the differences of casteism.

This is our culture. The Nationalist Congress
Party is known as the party that strictly
adheres to its principles.

Born in the land of Maharashtra Yugapurush
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj pioneered the
mantra of people’s Swarajya and good
governance. Great Saints like Saint
Dnyaneshwar, Saint Tukaram, Saint
Eknath, Sant Janabai, Sant Muktabai, Saint
Goroba Kaka, Saint Chokhoba, Saint
Sawata Maharaj, Saint Basweshwara
Swami, Saint Jagnade Maharaj, Saint
Jumdev Baba inculcated the mantra of
humanitarian approach to all.

Maharashtra is the birth place of many great
human beings like the pioneer of
Swarajyarakshak Sambhaji Maharaj,

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

Mahatma Jyotiba Phule, Shahu Maharaj,
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, Maulana Azad,
Saint Gadge Baba, Saint Tukdoji Maharaj,
Annabhau Satke, Birsa Munda, Shahir
Amar Shaikh who were all visionaries and
social reformers of India.

Rashtramata Rajmata Jijau Masaheb,
Punyashlok Ahilyadevi Holkar, Kranti Jyoti
Savitridevi Phule, Mata Ramai made
invaluable contributions in building
Maharashtra. Nationalist Congress Party is
committed to Women Empowerment as
inspired by the philosophy and morals of
these great women.

The essence and legacy of their ideas is the
core of the Nationalist Congress Party.
Equality, fraternity, and all-inclusiveness are
the breath and soul of NCP.

NCP believes in “Sabka Saath, Sabka
Vikas, Sabka Prayas, Sabka Vishwas’.
Today’s Lok Sabha election is important for
the trinity of “Nation’s Development,
Nation’s Trust and Nation’s support”.

This Lok Sabha election is crucial so that
every citizen of India will feel proud to be a
citizen of developed India.

Stability is the foundation for a family, and it
is the duty of every voter to choose a stable
government. The stable government
speeds up the decision-making process in
the interest of the nation. Large projects and
welfare schemes can be implemented with
consensus. You must participate in this Lok
Sabha election as a well-informed voter with
a futuristic vision. You must vote for the
nation’s stability.

NCP is committed to strengthen the
leadership of Prime Minister Narendra
Modiji in the role of “Nationalists for the
Nation”.



Having faith in the leadership of Prime
Minister Narendra Modiji, Nationalist
Congress Party leader Ajitdada Pawar has
joined hands with BJP led NDA in Mahayuti.
As a finance minister of the state, while
implementing fiscal discipline in
Maharashtra, it is being ensured that
citizens get best services and facilities by
balancing the revenue collection and
expenditure. The NCP is trying to keep the
state ahead in health, education and other
sectors. Maharashtra has the largest
number of foreign investors in the country
due to its investor friendly policies.

The Nationalist Congress Party has been
continuously implementing various
schemes and programmes for the upliftment
and progress of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Adivasis and other
backward classes by bringing them into
mainstream for social justice.

Deputy Chief Minister Ajitdada Pawar has
taken ambitious decisions for safety of
minority community and their inclusion in the
mainstream. The share capital of Maulana
Azad Corporation has been increased to
Rs. 500 crore and substantial increase is
given in the scholarships for higher studies
in foreign countries.

To ensure no community in the state is left
behind, planning is made to provide
financial assistance by establishing
independent corporations.

The Nationalist Congress Party has always
been known as a progressive and reformist
party. The NCP believes in the trinity of
‘Truth, Non-violence and Love’ a concept of
the Father of the nation, Mahatma Gandhi.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

The architect of united Maharashtra,
Hon’ble Yashwantrao Chavan Saheb is the
inspiration of NCP. Our party respects and is
proud of the modern and progressive
thoughts of Yashwantrao Chavan Saheb.
His cultured politics and progressive ideas
are the legacy of the NCP.

With inspiration from Shiv-Phule-Shahu-
Ambedkar may the fraternity in the country
increase day by day.

The Nationalist Congress Party is soliciting
votes to make India a Vishwa Guru under
the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra
Modiji. We are confident that the public will
continue to repose faith in Prime Minister
Narendra Modiji. The NCP is contesting the
polls under the able leadership of Ajitdada
Pawar with the “Clock symbol”. We appeal
to you to press the button in front of the clock
symbol and make the NCP candidates win
with a huge majority. A vote to Nationalist
Congress Party means a vote for Nation’s
progress.

Brothers and sisters, exercise your vote and
elect worthy representatives. Vote for the
candidates of the Nationalist Congress
Party contesting on Clock symbol and the
candidates of the alliance parties —
Mahayuti, to safeguard the destiny of
Maharashtra for the next five years.

Jai Hind, Jai Maharashtra,
Jai Rashtravadi!

Sunil Tatkare
President - Maharashtra

is | OKSABHA ELECTIONS MANES? - 20] — ——— EEE



Our Stand

With the target of five trillion dollar econmy,
India is on its way to become the third-
largest economy in the world and a
developed nation. This will be possible due
to all inclusive development policies of
Union Government under the leadership of
Prime Minister Narendra Modiji. India had
occupied an important place at global level.
In the crisis situations like war, economic
crisis or social disruption, India has
emerged as a dominant force in the true
sense. Prime Minister Narendra Modiji's
stature as a Vishwa Guru for India has been
proved. Under his leadership, our nation is
heading for 'Viksit Bharat' in 2047 from the
present Amrit Kal. The Indian economy has
evolved as the top five economies of the
world by promoting all-round development
in every sector and with the objective of
development in all sections of society. Many
countries have responded well to the digital
infrastructure developed by India as an
effective measure to empower the poor and
to reduce their dependence on the cash
economy. Under the able leadership of
Prime Minister Narendra Modiiji, all states in
the country are experiencing balanced
development and the GDP of the nation has
also increased. In both 2014 and 2019
elections, the NDAgot the absolute majority.
Still, only after the verdict of the Supreme
Court, Prime Minister Narendra Modiji
proceeded to build the grand temple of Lord
Shri Ram. The Ram Temple issue was thus
settled. This was welcomed by all sections
of the society.

Prime Minister Narendra Modiji has led our
country in the fight against the Corona virus
Pandemic with transparency and skillful
administration. Ambitious decisions and far
reaching projects are implemented in the
States and Union Territories like
Lakshadweep, Jammu and Kashmir,

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

Andaman and Nicobar, Ladakh, along with
the North Eastern states which were earlier
neglected in the development journey of the
nation. Under Prime Minister Modiji's
Leadership, India's diplomacy in dealing
with both Pakistan and China has proved its
independent and autonomous foreign policy
at the international level. Also, the
establishment of cordial relations of
unprecedented friendship with Islamic
countries has led to the construction of a
grand Hindu temple there too. This is a
matter of pride for our Indian culture and our
foreign policy.

Prime Minister Narendra Modiji and India
were showered with praise at the G20
summit for various achievements. In the last
10 years, the NDA government under the
leadership of Prime Minister Narendra
Modiji has successfully implemented all-
inclusive schemes of public benefits along
with development projects. These include
Jandhan Yojana, Skill Development
Mission, Make in India, Mission Swachh
Bharat, Shram-Eva-Jayate Yojana, Beti
Bachao Beti Padhao Yojana, Prime Minister
Mudra Yojana, Smart City, Amrut Mission,
Ujjwala Yojana, Prime Minister Suraksha
Bima Yojana, Pension scheme, Digital India
Start-up India, Namami Gange Yojana,
Ayushman Bharat, Jaljeevan Mission, Kisan
Sanman Nidhi, Vishwakarma Yojana and
Pradhan Mantri Nari Shakti Yojana. Due to
the benefits of these schemes, a strong
foundation has been laid for citizens to be
Atma Nirbhar. Nationalist Congress Party
believes that today's Atma Nirbhar Bharat
will be 'Viksit Bharat' in the year 2047, the
centenary year of independence.

Following this path of national development,
the government of Maharashtra has also
undertaken balanced development plans.
Vidarbha, Marathwada, Konkan, the rest of
Maharashtra, and the capital city of Mumbai



are all playing important roles in increasing
the state's Human Development Index due
to the creation of a wide network of
infrastructure projects and promoting,
logistics, trade, and industry. Our resolve is
Maharashtra a “Partner in Nation’s
Development” and the “Nationalists for
the Nation” is our vision.

Maharashtra

Maharashtra is known as the financial
capital of the country which promotes
financial inclusiveness. Apart from this,
Maharashtra
also tops with
favourable
scores in the
social and
economic
indicators set by the
Centre. Maharashtra is also
known as the most progressive state
in the country with its leadership in
economic and industrial sectors.
Maharashtra has resolved to regain its past
glory of economic progress by making every
effort to be a 1 trillion dollar economy. We
believe that in the future, this resolution will
play a decisive role in fulfilling the
aspirations of all sections of society and
youth, in particular by boosting employment
generation.

The Mahayuti Government is implementing
infrastructure projects worth Rs. 8 Lakh
Crore across the state. Assets will be
created if the infrastructure is developed.
Asset creation will generate employment.
This will increase revenue & the revenue
increase will give raise to purchasing power.
The government firmly believes that the flow

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

of money in the economy will develop the
economy. The priority of the Mahayuti
government is to take the size of the
economy of the Mumbai Metropolitan
Region to $300 billion by 2030 and complete
various infrastructure projects in the region.
The government is also promoting
agriculture and agro-based industries with
emphasis on manufacturing and
engineering services.

The Nationalist Congress Party, which
preserves the legacy of progressive ideas of
Shiv- Phule-Shahu- Ambedkar, has
consistently taken the role of inclusive
development while maintaining social
harmony. The Nationalist Congress Party is
following the same Path. NCP has given
priority to women's empowerment and
gender equality. Along with its allies, the
NCP recently announced the state's fourth
women's policy on the occasion of
International Women's Day. The policy aims
to increase the Participation of women in all
spheres of society. The NCP is committed to
remain the preferred and trusted party of the
people in the state with excellent service
and development.

As our nation has completed 75 years of
independence, we are handing over this
manifesto of the Nationalist Congress Party
to the people for the Lok Sabha 2024
election. In this Amrit Kal, we are confident
that the people will accept the role of
"Nationalists for the Nation".

Ajit Pawar
National President

is | OKSABHA ELECTIONS MANES? - 20] — ——— Ess



NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

Nationalist Congress is supporting and
participating in Sabka Saath - Sabka Vikas
campaign

It includes,

Free Ration distribution to 80 crore citizens of
India. The scheme will be extended for next 5
years.

50 crore beneficiaries in Jan Dhan Yojana
Pukka Houses allotted to 4 Core Citizens

More than 25 crore citizens have been brought
over the poverty-line.

More than 46 crore citizens have benefited by
more than Rs. 27 Lakh Crore loans from Mudra
Yojana.

Constitutional status given to National Backward
Class Commission.

Loans sanctioned to more than 63 lakh street
vendors under Prime Minister Swanidhi Yojana

Free power supply through Prime Minister Surya
Ghar Yojana.

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024


Agriculture

The farmers are the backbone of India's
progress, ascent, and prosperity.
Strengthening the farmers will
strengthen the nation's prosperity.
Nationalist Congress Party is the party
that respects farmers and agriculture.

The farmers of Maharashtra have
always been an important component of
the progress of our nation. Therefore,
our party is committed to strengthen the
farmers and that is our resolution.

Self-sufficient farmers, prosperous
farmers is our objective.

Minimum Support Price (MSP) is the
right of farmers, which we will protect.

We ensure that the farm produce will be
protected from damage caused by nature’s
fury by establishing necessary logistic
facilities alongwith markets. Also we will
ensure financial aid to such farmers.

We will promote technology and
collective farming to increase farm
productivity.

We will create a chain of Farmers
Producer Organisations (FPOs) to
enable the farmers to be exporters
themselves.

NREGA will be linked to Agriculture
sector to provide skilled labour and to
reduce cost of production.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

We will strengthen the horticulture,
floriculture, fisheries, sericulture, poultry,
sheep and goat rearing and agriculture
allied industries.

We will promote organic farming for
healthy diets and strong citizens.

We will implement all-inclusive farmers
centric policy for ethanol production and
export for sugarcane growers. We are
committed to ensure that the ethanol
producing industries do not suffer due to
fluctuations in the global market and the
interests of the farmers are safeguarded.

We will strengthen the solar, wind and
hydro-electric power projects to
generate non-conventional energy for
sustainable power supply to increase
agricultural productivity and income and
to reduce the dependence of farmers on
conventional power supply.

We will make the crop insurance scheme
more accessible by expanding the scope
of Agricultural crop Insurance Scheme.

We will urge the Central Government to
unify the other coastal states for granting
fisheries a status of Fish Farming.

Farm fencing scheme will be
implemented to protect the farms from
wild animals and other elements.

Currently, each farmer receives Rs. 6
thousand per year from the Central
Government under the ‘Pradhan Mantri
Kisan Sanman Nidhi’ Scheme. The State



Government also contributes Rs. 6
Thousand to make the total Rs. 12
thousand. We will make all efforts to
raise this amount substantially.

Economic Growth /

Employment /
Industry

India is leaping ahead towards becoming
a $ 5 trillion economy in which
Maharashtra will contribute a lion's share
of $ 1 trillion economy. The path is set to
fulfil the resolution of 'Viksit Bharat’.

Nationalist Congress Party is committed
to ensure that Maharashtra remains the
main contributor of progress of
developed India.

Maharashtra is the number one state in
the country in collection of Goods and
Service Tax. The share of GST in state's
own revenue will increase further to make
Maharashtra's contribution the highest in
the economic progress of the nation.

Maharashtra is the largest industrialised
state in the country. Maharashtra
accounts for 14.2% of the country's GDP.
Maharashtra accounts for 17.3% of total
exports. So, we will ensure that the leap
will be even higher as there is a Mahayuti
Government in the state and NDA led
Governmentin the centre.

Maharashtra is the leading state in the
country to attract Foreign direct
investment. Maharashtra alone accounts
for 38.78% of the total FDI in the country.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

At the World Economic Forum (WEF) in
Davos in January 2024, the state signed
MoUs with more than Rs. 3 Lakh 53
thousand Crore with various international
companies. With these MoUs, 2 Lakh jobs
will be generated in the state. It is our
resolution to provide “work for every hand
and income to every family” by promoting
domestic and foreign investments in the
state.

We will ensure sustainable credit supply
and market access to industries by
establishing and promoting Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises by combining
textile enabling technologies with Khadi
and Village Industries.

We will place emphasis on the policies
that will ensure economic self-reliance
and long-term sustainability for large
scale employment creating enterprises
such as handlooms and machine looms.

At present loans of up to Rs. 10 Lakh
are issued from Mudra Yojana. We will
try to increase the loan amount to Rs.20
Lakh.

Skill Development /

Human Resources

Everyone has different skills and
abilities. Making each person
economically self-reliant and industry
friendly helps local employment and
decentralization of industries. We
believe that new entrepreneurs will come
up in rural areas by effectively



implementing the policies of skill
development & thus paving the way for
decentralisation of industries. This
will generate large employment
opportunities if combined with Human
Resources development.

We are committed to make Maharashtra
the skill capital of the nation.

By expanding the scope of Vishwakarma
Scheme, efforts will be made to expand
the industries based on modern
technology of skill development for 12
Balutedar classes.

The Nationalist Congress Party will
strive to increase the remuneration of
skill trained youth working on contract
basis in private companies up to Rs. 20
thousand per month.

“Atma Nirbhar Bharat is our resolution”.

Women and
Child Welfare, Gender

Equality

The Nationalist Congress Party is
committed to provide opportunities to
women, girls, and children of the state to
implement the right to equality given to
all citizens by the constitution of India
and implement its welfare schemes and
policies for their development in social,
economic and other spheres.

Matrushakti and Matrusanman are the
thread of our party.

The Fourth Women's Policy of

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

Maharashtra State was announced on
Women's Day, 8th March, 2024, with
specific and qualitative indicators for
women empowerment and as an
index to measure progress in the
implementation.

To respect motherhood in the traditional
paternal system, it has been made
mandatory for everyone to put the name
of their own mother before the father's
name. We are determined to implement
this revolutionary decision of giving
respect to motherhood at the national
level.

The NCP was always insistent for 33
percent reservation for women. In
accordance with it the Union
Government has enacted a legislation
providing 33 percent reservation for
women in Loksabha and Legislative
Assemblies.

We will emphasize on making available
of safe market and financial facilities for
women self-help groups and women
entrepreneurs.

We will continue to insist that there
should be a stern policy at the national
level to prevent Human Trafficking for the
safety of women.

We will try to increase scope and spread
of 'Lek Ladki’ scheme for the dignity of a
girl child.

Social and political empowerment of
women will be emphasized for equal

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024 =



opportunities for them in the political
sphere.

We urge support for child safety and
violence free childhood and provision of
increased manpower and resources to
curb sexual offences against children
with the strict enforcement of POCSO.
Special attention will be given to ensure
for adequate provision in the budget for
child welfare and specially abled children
as well as for all children who need care
and safety across the nation.

Working Women's Hostels will be
constructed for the working women in
the cities.

Youth and Sports

The youth is the foundation and future of
our country. Employment and motivation
for ideas is the path for successful bright
future. The Nationalist Congress Party is
known as a Youth oriented and youth
centric party. We will focus on culture,
respect and morals for their happiness
and prosperity.

We will emphasize on increasing the
contribution of the youth power in the
progress of the nation.

We will ensure equal access to
education for the youth.

We promise to provide employment to
our youth.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

We will emphasize that substantial
provision will be made for sports and the
playgrounds which will ensure that
international standard training centres
will be set up for our sports persons. The
players who bring glory to the nation on
an international level will be suitably
honoured.

We will continue to appeal for greater
encouragement and opportunities for
young athletes across the nation under
‘Khelo India” campaign.

Preference must be given to transparent
recruitments. We will insist that stern
action is taken against the paper leaks.

Senior Citizens

About 10% of the population of India
is above the age of 60. It is expected
to reach at 12% by 2030 and 20% by
2050. Therefore, it will be our priority
to implement various measures for
the dignity and safety of senior
citizens.

This age group is called as ‘Silver
Economy'. We believe that initiatives will
be taken for participation of this economy
to the mainstream economy.

Our party will insist that the people above
60 years of age get 50% concession in
the rail and metro travel across the
country.

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024 =m



We will appeal for Ayushyaman Bharat
Yojana_ to be applicable to all citizens
over the age of 70 years.

Social Justice /
Minorities / Other

Backward Classes

Our party believes in the right to live as a
human being irrespective of caste, creed
and religion. The party believes in
equality, fraternity and unity.

The NCP has faith in Sane Guruji's quote
“The true religion is to offer love to the
world”. It is our duty to bring the deprived
and backward sections of the society into
the mainstream of the society.

We will demand for a caste based
census.

We will endeavour to have Maulana
Azad Research and Training Institute at
the national level. We will continue to
push for the implementation of measures
and funds to ensure that the students
from minority communities will get
opportunities of higher education,
entrepreneurship and employment
through this institution.

We will try to upgrade the educational
quality of the Urdu Medium Schools to
Semi English Medium Schools in order
to raise the educational standards of the
Urdu Medium Schools.

We will insist on the service and facility
centric policy for Haj Pilgrims.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

Our priority will be to ensure education
and employment opportunities for girls in
the minority sect. We will try for the
special financial policy by the centre.

We will focus on safety measures for
citizens travelling abroad for jobs and
employment, especially in the Gulf
counties.

It will be our endeavour to establish a
special education / training mechanism
for the youth belonging to the scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes to set up
enterprises.

We will try to have a policy for opening
engineering and medical colleges for
educational institutes belonging to
scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes.

‘Our party will try to set up an
independent ministry for implementation
of OBC welfare schemes at the national
level on the lines of Maharashtra.

Urban Development

Cities are considered to be the
engines of growth. Safe, pleasant
and eco-friendly cities are considered
to be assets of the country.
Maharashtra's urbanisation rate is
46%. That means, half of Maharashtra
is urban and hence urban
development is one of the leading
priorities of the NCP.



Our policy is to accelerate development
projects which enhance the livelihood of
the citizen by enabling urban
infrastructure and transport facilities.

Our party ensures affordable housing,
network of public transport, a safe city for
women and a dignified life for senior
citizens.

Our party gives importance to
environment, aesthetics, art and culture,
gardens and playgrounds for a clean city
and pollution free air.

Our party will ensure that the indigenous
tribal citizens of newly created Nagar
Panchayats and Municipal Councils in
the tribal dominated areas will not be
deprived of the benefits of tribal welfare
measures.

We will insist that 3 crore new dwellings
under PM Awas Yojana should be
available.

Rural Development

A village is an integral unit of the
country's development. The village is
also the centre that conserves the Indian
tradition and culture. NCP is committed
for strengthening and decentralization of
Panchayati Raj System of rural
development.

We will focus on building eco-friendly
and self-reliant villages.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

Health-Education-Sanitation-
Environment and Employment are on
party's five-point agenda to improve the
rural areas.

NCP will play an active role in the new
scheme of Pradhan Mantri Shet-
Shivar-Panand Rasta on the Lines of
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana.

VY

Public Health

We will ensure provision of affordable
and qualitative health service on the
lines of AIMS.

For modernization of Primary Health
centres, we will make available the best
of medical services to the people in rural
areas.

We will try our best to ensure free
medical treatment up to Rs. 5 Lakh to
poor and needy persons under
Ayushyaman Bharat Yojana

Irrigation

Water Supply

Water conservation and water supply is
the need of the future. Our party is
committed to accord highest priority for
the necessity of Water Policy at the
national level for equal distribution and
sharing of water.

We insist that at the national level, river
linking projects, river cleaning projects

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024 ==



should be taken up at a large scale. Our
party will ensure the projects with
ambitious and giving far-reaching
positive impacts such as Krishna-
Bheema stabilisation project, Nar-Par
scheme and the diversion of water from
the Western Ghats to the drought-
affected areas should be declared as
national projects.

Environment

Climate Change and Global warming are
challenges. As a solution, our party
proposes to implement the Maharashtra
State Climate Change Action Plan with
public participation. Efforts will be made
for the provision of technology and
financial assistance from the Union
Government.

A policy will be formulated to find
solutions on climate change by
preparing a special programme for
pollution-free rivers.

ea

Provision of 9.35% of the funds is made
for 9.35% tribal population in the state
under the budget. The NCP's stand will
be that there should be an independent
reserved fund for the tribal community at
the national level in proportion to the
tribal population on the lines of
Maharashtra.

Tribal welfare

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

LOKSABHA ELECTIONS MANIFESTO - 2024

The precipitation is high in forest areas.
However, according to the Forest Act,
building a water body is prohibited in the
forests. As a result, water scarcity is
caused in the forests due to hot summers
and droughts. So, the NCP will pursue to
amend the law to create water reserves
in the forest areas and we will appeal for
the “Birsa Munda Water Conservation
Scheme” to be implemented at the
national level.

Classical Language

status to Marathi

Maharashtra's mother tongue Marathi
has a glorious history. Sant
Dnyaneshwar has taken Marathi
language to the next Level by writing a
humanistic book 'Dnyaneshwari' in the
Twelfth Century. This is a classic
treasure of Marathi language and
culture. We are very proud of that. The
NCP is constantly trying to get Marathi,
the classical Language status and this is
the right of Marathi conscious and
Marathi people.

Poet Suresh Bhat captures the mood of
Marathi people and conveys importance
of Marathi language as:

"We are fortunate that we speak
Marathi.

We are happy that we listen to
Marathi"



Maharashtra’'s Architect
should be honoured

with Bharat Ratna
Award.

The architect of 'United Maharashtra’,
Hon'ble Yashwantrao Chavan Saheb is
the inspiration of NCP. His political life
was cultured and respected. As the
nation's Deputy Prime Minister, Defence
Minister, Chairman of the Eighth Finance
Commission and the first Chief Minister
of United Maharashtra, he has a lion's
share in building the nation and
Maharashtra. Hon'ble Yashwantrao
Chavan Saheb has contributed to form
the united Maharashtra state and
glorifying it on India's map.

NCP will play an important role in
ensuring that Hon'ble Yashwantrao
Chavan Saheb is honored with the
Bharat Ratna.

NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

Foreign Policy

India is the nation that has given the
world Buddha's message of peace.
‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' is our soul.
Humanism and fraternity will flourish in
the world. This is NCP stand.

India has taken a strong stand against
global terrorism. Despite the scourge of
terrorism, India has always been
successful in maintaining friendly
relations with its neighbours.

We assure that NCP will continue to
support the foreign policy of the Union
government. NCP wishes that India
should get a permanent seat in the UN
Security Council.

is | OKSABHA ELECTIONS MANES? - 20] — ——— Ess



NATIONALIST CONGRESS PARTY

The Election Commission of India has allotted Clock symbol to Ajit Anantrao Pawar led
Nationalist Congress Party (NCP). The matter is presently subjudice before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court and subject to final verdict, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the interim has
allowed the NCP to use the 'Clock' symbol for all ensuing election campaigns.

Publisher - Shivajirao Garje, General Secretary and Treasurer, Maharashtra Region Nationalist Congress Party
Printed by : Pacific Prints : 66, Bazargate Street (Perin Nariman Street), Fort, Mumbai - 400001.

002 :AlD [e}0L
